#summary PCB Design using KiCAD

= KiCAD Schematic and PCB Design Software =

The gMeter circuit schematic and PCB design is done in free and open source, KiCAD software. KiCAD is available free of charge for Windows, Linux and Mac. However, I have not had much success with the OS X version, so I run the Linux version, under a VMWare virtual machine Ubuntu Desktop v12.04 LTS. (The Windows version is also very stable and works well. But Windows is not open source, like this project is.)

The project files are in trunk/hardware.

There are two project files, once for the standard (larger) size gMeter (`gMeter.pro`) and one for the smaller version, using the MLF ATmega chip (`gMeter-MLF.pro`).

== Bill of Mterial (BOM) File ==

An (incomplete at time of writing) bill of materials (BOM) Excel spreadsheet file is located at `trunk/hardware/gmeter-bom.xlsx`.

== PDF Schematic and Parts Placement Guides ==

There are PDF versions of the circuit schematics and part placement guide (top layer silk screen) at [https://code.google.com/p/gmeter-usb/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Fhardware%2Fassembly trunk/hardware/assembly].

== Frozen PCB Files ==

When I submit an order to the factor, I take an archive copy of the PCB files for that version. Two of these exist at the time of this writing, in trunk: `hardware-v1.0_frozen` and `hardware-mlf-v1.0_frozen`. These files should never be changed.

== Production Gerber and Drill Files ==

These can be found in the frozen archive folders (see above) in, sub-folders`production` and `production-mlf`.

== Why not Eagle from CADsoft? ==

I get asked this a lot. The answer is simple; "Because it's not open source and this is an open source project."